Bunny, Bruce Springsteen, Charli XCX. So the subway station itself is super bustling. It's got multiple levels. And then on top of that, you have a shopping mall. And it's in this Escher-like maze that Jed first noticed something strange. On the upper end in the mall there is one Wetzel's Pretzels, and it looks like any Wetzel's Pretzels. And then within the system on the top floor, there is a Wetzel's Pretzels, and on the bottom floor there is another Wetzel's Pretzels. And the spaces that they're in, they look like no larger than a broom closet. It just kind of doesn't make sense. I don't how you set up one place like that, much less two, much less a third location. If you were to walk a circuit between all of them, how far away are they from one another? You could get to all of them within a minute. It's really that quick. Wow. When did you notice that there were three Wetzel's Pretzels locations? By the time I moved into Brooklyn, like, the one in the mall, that was already there. And then about two years ago, the other two moved in. I don't know if they moved in at the same time, but they definitely moved in within the same month. I'm like, what are we doing? This is excessive. Underneath Jed's skepticism, there are three questions. First, he wants to understand why there are three Wetzel's Pretzels clustered so close together in the Atlantic Barclays station. Second, he wants to know if they're competitors or collaborators. And third, he wants to know if any of these locations are actually turning a profit. And we started looking into this, and it turned out the Atlantic Avenue Barclays station was not the only instance of this sort of Wetzel's cluster. Turns out there are also three Wetzel's Pretzels at the American Dream Mall in New Jersey. At the Del Amo Fashion Center in Torrance, California, there are three Wetzel's Pretzels. And at the Crypto.com Arena, where the LA Lakers play, there are five Wetzel's Pretzels locations. In fact, the more we looked into it, the more we noticed where one Wetzel's Pretzels location exists, other Wetzel's Pretzels are often very close by. And that's when we decided to call you, Alexi, to try and solve Jed's little mystery. Sign me up. Let's go. What is it about Jed's question that is so interesting to you? I think Jed's question is a question that I have had personally, and that I think a lot of us have. It's like, exactly in this delectable sweet spot-- or savory, I guess, in this case-- of like, something in the world that is all around us all the time. And so it just felt like one of those things that is, like, a tiny question, and it's kind of funny because it's so small. But it actually touches on, like, the fabric of cities and just the things we walk around and are surrounded by every day. So I am eager to get out there and hit the streets and figure out what's going on. Go for it. I'd love to hear the answer. And not having to go out and do it myself makes it even more enticing to me. Yes, let me do this one. Let me ride. Hello, and welcome to Planet Money. I'm Alexi Horowitz-Ghazi. And I'm Alex Goldman. I think we've all had those moments of looking around the world and all of a sudden, you'll be surrounded by three Starbucks on a given street or a handful of McDonald's lining the halls of an airport terminal. Sort of feels like you're watching the ebb and flow of some titanic corporate battle you can just barely see. So when Jed flagged for us three Wetzel's all within spitting distance of each other, we knew there was some bigger story under there. So today on the show, we go deep inside the pretzel supply chain to find out how Wetzel's took over this subway station. We'll hear of one man's journey to his own salty American dream, learn about consumer behavior and how franchises work, and of course, there will be plenty of twists along the way. OK, so for today's episode, we're going to hit Play on that Hyperfixed story based on my little reporting journey in just a minute. To set things up, I set out to untangle Jed's pretzel-based mystery and then hand it over that reporting to you, Alex, and your team to put the episode together. Which worked out great for me because you did all the hard work. You know, I love that for you. And I began my quest in maybe an obvious place, by calling up Wetzel's Pretzels corporate. And that is how I met a jovial man named John Fischer. The people say, what's your job? My job is to bring pretzels to the people. I even have a wristband on that says pretzels to the people. It's, like, kind of our mantra. Like, wherever there's people, there should be pretzels. John retired just last month. But when I spoke with him, he was the head of development for Wetzel's Pretzels, which means it was his job to help the company's franchisees find and build successful locations. And that mantra, it's not just a catchphrase. It's kind of a shorthand for Wetzel's business strategy. It also holds part of the answer to Jed's questions. And for that, we're just going to play an excerpt of that Hyperfixed episode, where Alex takes the reins. OK, so remember a couple of minutes ago, when Alexi was talking about how this question might be the key to understanding not just why there are clusters of Wetzel's, but why there are clusters of Starbucks, and McDonald's, and all of these other
