They tell the property owners, what is done is done. Now, you're going to have to replace all these trees or pay the fee. For 1,500 trees, the fee would come out to around half million dollars. And they threw a fit. And instead of saying, oh, well, we'll pay this much, or how about we plant these trees, they hung up, and they called a lawyer. And then all the lawsuits started. This is how Canton, Michigan, ends up at the center of a major legal battle, a battle over not just the tree protection law, but about the limits of what cities can even do when it comes to permitting and zoning. This dispute makes the local news, and from there, it quickly attracts the attention of a lawyer named Chance Weldon. Chance had been looking for a case just like this. I'm the director of litigation at the Texas Public Policy Foundation, and that means that I sue the government for a living, which is an absolutely sweet gig. The Texas Public Policy Foundation is this free market think-tank. And Chance is a constitutional lawyer. He's one of those constitutional lawyers who cares a lot about property rights. He says as a kid growing up in Houston, he learned a lot about what it means not to have property rights. His parents were renters. They didn't own their own home. And the one thing that always stuck out to me is like, you couldn't have a tree house. You couldn't change things in the yard because you had to ask the landlord first. And the thing that distinguished to me ownership from renting is not having to ask the landlord. And so anytime I see the city come in and act in ways that remind me of a landlord, it just sets off my alarm bells of somebody's property rights are being violated. Around 2018, Chance's property rights alarm bells were going off on account of these tree protection ordinances. He had watched them pop up all over the country, including where he lives in Texas. To him, these towns were pretty obviously violating people's property rights. And, OK, now idea property rights seems simple. They're what you get to do when you own property. Typically, that means that I can sell it, or I can use it, or I can change it, or I can build something on it. But there are limits to your property rights. You only get to do what you want up until it affects neighbors. So cities can tell you, for instance, you can't put a slaughterhouse next to a schoolyard. And before you build anything, they can make get construction permits and noise permits and environmental permits. And Chance agrees that a lot of these local regulations are important. But he and the folks he works with think that modern zoning and permitting laws have gone too far. He thinks a lot of them are unconstitutional, that they violate what is called the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment. So the Takings Clause says that the government cannot take private property, except for a public use and with just compensation. The basic idea here is the government can't force you to provide property to the public for free. So traditionally, that has meant that the government can't physically take your land without paying you for it. But there's also something called a regulatory taking. The Supreme Court has said that
