if you went to these antivirus conferences with a lot of fun gals and guys, the possibility of cyber espionage was discussed as that, as a possibility. It was theoretical. It was theoretical. There were-- Wouldn't it be cool? This might be happening. Yeah, you're like, there's no way, people won't. There's value there, of course. And then, you know, Stuxnet is discovered, and you realize, not only has this been happening and at a scale and capacity way above anything we'd ever found before, but it's been happening for years. What had been happening was that Israel and the US, allegedly, had used cyberweapons to destroy real-world, physical things. They did this by managing to get a thumbdrive into Iran and inserting malware into the computer network at the heart of their uranium enrichment program, the system that controlled the centrifuges. And Stuxnet was very, very clever. It spread throughout the network and carefully noted how everything looked when it was working normally, saved that, and then gave the centrifuges instructions to go haywire, speeding up and slowing down and braking, all while making everything in the computer system look A-OK. It looked normal. So the operators are hearing that these things are, like, making these weird noises. They're spinning up. They sound like-- it sounds like things aren't going well in this room next door. But I'm looking at the computer, and the computer tells me everything's normal. All in all, Stuxnet reportedly destroyed a fifth of all the centrifuges that Iran was using. It led to nuclear scientists getting fired. And most importantly, it is widely believed to have slowed down Iran's nuclear program. And to the cyber-paleontologists of the world like Jags, when the bones of Stuxnet were dug up, they revealed this whole new age of cyberwarfare. But Jags always believed that Stuxnet was just a hint of what was out there. Just a tibia. Clearly, we didn't even know about all the different things they were doing. So year after year, Jags remained committed to figuring out his white whale, figuring out the puzzle of Fast16. Who made it? Who were they targeting? What exactly were they doing to that target, and how? But he didn't make much progress until earlier this year for a very this-year reason-- AI. Yeah, here's why. Jags heads a big team of researchers at his cybersecurity firm. And like everyone else these days, he was wondering, could these new AI tools help us in our jobs? Could they do our jobs? Could they do a job that was so hard, even I, Jags, couldn't do it? Could they
