know that you're going to go there, right? So what's interesting is you have the ultimate destination type of concepts where you build a store, and if you put a store 5 miles away, the franchisee's really mad because, hey, I have customers coming over there, and you know, I'm going to lose 10%, 20% of my sales. Wetzel's is kind of the opposite of that. We literally have malls that have five stores in the same mall. Because we're an impulse product, for us, it's really just about is the mall big enough, or is there enough traffic and different occasions to support different impulse purchases in that mall? And is there cannibalization when you open a second store? A little bit, but not very much. It's pretty amazing. I think-- I was surprised when I got here. I was like, really? You can have two stores in the same mall? I've never seen that before. And now I'm sitting here putting three and four in some malls because it's really about that impulse nature. So they're not going there specifically for you. You know, whether it's a subway, or a theme park, or a stadium, you're going to have different locations based on where the people are to service them. And so not a lot of businesses can do that. One of the other big factors undergirding this model is that corporate Wetzel's will not let different franchisees open storefronts under the same roof. So anytime you see a cluster of Wetzel's Pretzels in the wild, know that every storefront under the same roof is owned by the same person. They aren't actually competing with each other, and any cannibalization that's happening has been at least partially planned. Also, some franchisees will open additional locations in the same space just to make sure that those spaces don't get taken by the competition. So these clusters function more like a defensive mapping sort of strategy. The other big thing is that the company gets final approval on all franchise locations. And because they've had the most success in malls and transport hubs and event spaces, that's where most of these clusters will be. So in this case, it's like, OK, these locations may seem to a layman like me walking through being like, how-- why would you possibly have these two pretzel stands so close to each other? Well, the proof is sort of in the profits? I think you have to look at every concept and what works for that concept, where they are on that-- I'll call it the destination-impulse spectrum. Yes. And if you're on the very high side of the impulse spectrum, you probably can get away with having several locations very close to each other to capture the traffic. And if you're on the other side of that spectrum, you probably don't want to think about doing that. It would probably be a lot of cannibalization and not really work. Yeah. So now we know why these locations are clustered so close together. That is to say, we know why they're there in theory. But we still wanted to know if this strategy was actually working in the Atlantic Barclays station. Were the three storefronts actually making money? And we knew just who we had to ask.
